## Agenda 13-01-2021, 14:00 GMT

Zoom link: https://zoom.us/j/91386559197

Every meeting we try to tackle these points, and if possible get some of them done in the meeting:

### Actions to do by this meeting:
For reference, these are the actions we want to do for next meeting:
- [Issue 14: Deciding what to read](https://github.com/very-good-science/data-ethics-club/issues/14) - @NatalieThurlby and @ninadicara (Confirm all wrapped up)
- [Issue 15: Code of Conduct](https://github.com/very-good-science/data-ethics-club/issues/15) - @ninadicara (Draft of CoC reading for first meeting)
- Decide on discussion questions for first meeting @NatalieThurlby

### Talking points
- Go over plan for the first meeting
  - Welcome/Code of Conduct/Zoom "raise hands" (can we both try to keep an eye on the hands? - interrupt me if I don't notice)
  - Ask if anyone else would like to summarise the reading material (if not Natalie to summarise).
  - Depending on the number of people, possibly split up into self-assigned breakout rooms based on the questions, and rotate through those.
  - Close the break out rooms and ask if anyone has anything to add, or any questions that they'd like to ask the group.
  - Highlight the next session in two weeks time.
  - Ask if there are any suggestions for what on the reading list they'd like to read next/what topics (post in the chat).
  - Remind people to sign up to the mailing list
  - Ask people to [email](mailto:grp-ethicaldatascience@groups.bristol.ac.uk) us or get in touch via GitHub if they want to be involved in organising, to suggest a paper, to lead a session, or to give us feedback.
- Mailing list reminder before first meeting.
- Note how to add non-GitHub people with all-contributors.
- (Optional - if we have time):
  - [Issue 29: Contribution Guidelines](https://github.com/very-good-science/data-ethics-club/issues/29)
  - [Issue 30: Organising reading list](https://github.com/very-good-science/data-ethics-club/issues/30)

### AOB
Is there anything else we'd like to add?

---
Please edit these issues to add more talking points to them, and/or edit this document to link more issues that you'd like to talk about.
