# How to add a write up to the website

Since the Data Ethics Club repository is primarily served by a website we have to update this site with the latest write ups. This file contains instructions on how to make these updates, assuming we've written a draft in HackMD. 

1. From the repository root, navigate to the `site>contents>write_ups` directory, and go inside the directory for the current year.  
2. Above the file browser, on the right, choose the option `Add file > Create New File`, name the file `DD-MM-YY_writeup.md` (date of the Data Ethics Club meeting).  
3. Copy in the contents of the write up (click next to the `1` in GH which is indicating the first line of the file). Add the admonition code (in the comment below this one) just below the title, but before the rest of the write up and change the text accordingly. Put the attendees at the bottom of the write up.  
4. IMPORTANT: to save, scroll down the the bottom and choose the "Create a new branch for this commit and start a pull request" option (this is not the default). Name the new branch something relating to the write up, e.g. "PrivateSpies", then click "Propose New File".  
5. You will be taken automatically to create a pull request. Write in any things that you'd like any particular feedback on, in the comments. You can also add reviewers here.  
6. You then need to add the markdown document to the Table of Contents on the main 'Write Ups' page by editing the `writeup.md` file ON THE BRANCH YOU JUST MADE. You can go to the branch you just made from the Pull Request page, as the Pull Request will say something like "NatalieTurlby wants to merge 1 commit into `main` from `YOUR_BRANCH_NAME`" (click YOUR_BRANCH_NAME). Alternatively, you can get to it by going to the homepage of the GH repository, and choosing from the dropdown menu on the left. Once you are on your branch, navigate to `site>contents>write_ups>write-ups.md`, choose "edit this file" (little pencil), add your new file's location to the top of the list of files, and commit changes with the "Commit directly to the YOUR_BRANCH_NAME branch".  
7. All done! 